---
title: "Hybrid life cycle assessment (H-LCA) for buildings and construction materials: A systematic review and meta-analysis"
authors:
  - "Abdulrahman Bakindi"
  - "Aoife Houlihan Wiberg"
  - "Jonathan Norman"
  - "Ellie Marsh"
  - "Stephen Allen"
doi: "10.1016/j.buildenv.2025.112630"
---

## Abstract

The construction and building sectors are crucial in combating climate change due to their significant embodied and whole-life carbon emissions. With the population and building floor area projected to rise significantly by 2050, robust assessments are needed to identify eco-friendly solutions. Life cycle assessment (LCA), particularly process-based (P-LCA) and input-output (I-O LCA) methods, is extensively used for assessing environmental sustainability. However, both approaches have drawbacks. Hybrid life cycle assessment (H-LCA) addresses these drawbacks by combining the strengths of both methods. This paper presents a systematic review and metaanalysis of the current status of H-LCA in the context of buildings and construction materials. It explores the methodologies and approaches currently employed in H-LCA, the current challenges and opportunities, and future directions. A comprehensive search across four research databases identified 46 studies. The review reveals that the adoption of H-LCA within the building and construction sectors has been slow but is gradually increasing. There is a noticeable lack of methodological clarity, with varied sources, databases and tools used in these studies, as well as a preference for national I-O (IO) tables over Multi-Regional Input-Output (MRIO) tables. Furthermore, the review finds that when addressing issues in their H-LCA models, such as correcting double counting, researchers use various strategies and methods suited to their particular goals, aims, and datasets. These models differ greatly, making a straight comparison between them difficult. The review combines the results of these papers and conducts a comparative analysis. The analysis shows that H-LCA generally yields higher values than P-LCA and I-O LCA methods in providing comprehensive results. Finally, this paper identifies several limitations in current H-LCA practices and concludes by discussing potential solutions to address them.


### Introduction

Addressing the environmental impacts of human activities, particularly in the construction and building sectors, is crucial to combating climate change[1,2]. The sectors are jointly responsible for 30 % of global final energy consumption and 27 % of total energy-related CO 2 emissions[3]. By 2050, the population will rise 22 % to around 9.7 billion[4], and the building floor area is projected to experience a substantial increase of approximately 75 % compared to its size in 2020[5]. This highlights the importance of assessing environmental impacts to pinpoint the areas that require improvement, thus enabling decisionand policy-making to effectively meet environmental targets.

Various methods to assess environmental performance exist[6]. Among these methods, life cycle assessment or analysis (LCA) is an internationally standardised and widely adopted sustainability tool[7,8]. LCA involves evaluating all inputs, outputs, and potential environmental impacts associated with a product system throughout its life cycle[9]. It comprises four main stages: goal and scope definition, life cycle inventory (LCI), life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) and interpretation[9]. LCI involves collecting and quantifying all the inputs (e.g., materials and energy) and outputs (e.g., emissions to air, soil and water) related to the product system being analysed[9]. In practice, LCI utilises two types of data: "foreground" data, specific to the product and controlled by the decision-maker, and "background" data, covering all other supporting processes not directly influenced by the decision-maker[7,10]. Background inventory data can come from process LCA (P-LCA) databases, such as Ecoinvent[11]and Gabi[12]databases, or from environmentally extended input-output (I-O LCA, EIO-LCA, EEIO-LCA, EEIO) or multiregional input-output tables (MRIO) (EE MRIO), such as EXIOBASE[13]and WIOD[14], or from a combination of both hybrid approaches (H-LCA)[15,16].

The most prevalent approach for evaluating environmental impacts and widely adopted by practitioners and researchers is process-based life cycle assessment (P-LCA)[8,17]. It employs a "bottom-up" approach and gathers data on inputs and outputs for each individual process[6,7,18]. These data are obtained from measurements, databases, surveys, and other sources[19]. By utilising data specific to a product or process, the P-LCA method provides detailed insights and identifies environmental hotspots, thus enabling sustainable development strategies[15,18]. However, its pursuit of high data quality demands substantial labour and time resources. Additionally, it is prone to inherent truncation error, which occurs when certain processes or data points are simplified or omitted, leading to inaccuracies in the assessment[20][21][22]; Fig.1.

Input-output life cycle assessment (I-O LCA or IO) originates from Leontief's input-output analysis, offering a comprehensive "top-down" approach to understanding inter-industry relationships[20,24]. It gained prominence in environmental analysis during the 1960s and began in LCA applications in the early 1990s[25]. Unlike P-LCA, the I-O approach particularly excels in capturing indirect emissions, which process-based LCA often struggles to fully account for. I-O LCA uses national economic tables (IO or I-O tables) or Multiregional Input-Output (MRIO tables), which account for exports and imports, to encompass all economic sectors within the country(s); hence, it does not suffer from truncation[6,7,17]. I-O LCA eliminates boundary-related issues common in P-LCA while being quick and cost-effective for preliminary screenings[7,17]. However, I-O LCA relies on national statistics that are highly aggregated, such as grouping all construction products and materials into one broad sector; Fig.1. This aggregation prevents detailed analysis of individual products and obscures their specific environmental effects[15,20,26].

To address the issues encountered within the P-LCA and I-O LCA methods, researchers introduced hybrid life cycle assessment (H-LCA)[15,16,27,28]. H-LCA combines the specificity of P-LCA with the macroeconomic insights of I-O LCA, creating a versatile framework that enhances the outcomes of both approaches. Combining the two can expand the P-LCA system boundary to include omitted emissions or increase the specificity of I-O results[16,18,29,30].

Given the significant environmental impacts associated with buildings and construction materials, exploring the benefits of the H-LCA for this sector is crucial. Despite the advancements in H-LCA, there is a noticeable lack of comprehensive analyses specifically tailored to buildings and construction materials. Previous research has primarily focused on general H-LCA methodologies or applications in other sectors. For example, Crawford et al.[15]explored methodological aspects of H-LCA and Islam et al.[16]provided a comprehensive review of LCI methods, highlighting their evolution, advantages and limitations, with illustrative simple case studies. Similarly, Luo and Ierapetritou[31]compared hybrid LCA methodologies using a biomass-based p-Xylene production case study. However, no study has specifically explored H-LCA applications in the building and construction sector, despite its unique challenges and significant environmental impacts. This paper, therefore, aims to fill this gap by systematically reviewing and analysing the current state of H-LCA in buildings and construction materials, identifying key challenges and opportunities, and providing insights to promote sustainable practices and reduce environmental impacts.

To achieve this, the review addresses the key question: "What is the current status of H-LCA for buildings and construction materials?" It aims to explore (1) the methodologies and approaches currently used in H-LCA for assessing the environmental impacts of buildings and construction materials, (2) the key challenges and limitations identified in these papers for the H-LCA in these sectors, and (3) potential solutions to address these challenges and knowledge gaps for future research.

The review begins with an introduction to the review method, detailing the research databases used, search queries, inclusion and exclusion criteria and the data collection process (Section 2). It then proceeds to examine the extracted papers, covering aspects such as publication uptake, geographical distribution, H-LCA methodologies (i. e., types of H-LCA and double-counting) and resources utilised (i.e., software and databases), and compares H-LCA results with those of I-O LCA and P-LCA (Section 3). This section provides an overview of the current state of research, summarises the main points and introduces them before discussing the findings in more detail in the following section. Finally, Section 4 delves deeper into the results and challenges discussed in Section 3, proposes potential solutions to address these limitations, and examines knowledge gaps identified in the reviewed papers.


## Fig. 1.

Comparison of Process-Based LCA (P-LCA) and Input-Output LCA (I-O LCA) methodologies: P-LCA (left) tracks detailed emissions from each production stage (e.g., cement from raw materials to the final product) but misses some emissions (grey icons). I-O LCA uses economic tables to estimate emissions across sectors, such as mining, construction and transport, but is highly aggregated, treating all construction products (cement, mortar, etc.) with the same value (e.g., CO 2 /£). Adapted from Weinold and Majeau-Bettez[23].


### Systematic review


#### Review method

This systematic literature review has followed an explicit, rigorous, and transparent methodology to assess and interpret all available research while minimising bias[32,33]. The methodological approach followed the Standardised Technique for Assessing and Reporting Reviews of Life Cycle Assessment (STARR-LCA) created by[33]. The STARR-LCA protocol is based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)[32].


#### Data collection

The literature search and paper collection were conducted from the 10th of June to the 3rd of July 2023, utilising four research databases: Web of Science, ScienceDirect, Scopus and SpringerLink, in conjunction with the University of Bath's own library system. These databases have been widely employed in synthesising high-quality research papers for systematic reviews[34]. Boolean operators were employed, allowing the construction of effective queries to retrieve relevant papers. The search terms used were ("hybrid life cycle assessment" OR "hybrid life cycle analysis" OR "hybrid LCA") AND ("building" OR "built environment" OR "infrastructure" OR "construction").

To ensure impartiality, clear inclusion and exclusion criteria were established for the selection of papers. This systematic review adhered to a couple of predefined criteria, as presented in Table1. The papers had to be freely accessible through the University of Bath subscriptions, published in English and address the research question formulated. Duplicated papers, literature reviews, and theoretical LCA frameworks without practical application were excluded. Also, all other nonbuilding related materials were omitted. The type of document and publication year were not restricted to ensure comprehensive coverage. The data retrieved from the database search underwent a three-phase filtering and screening process: first-phase screening (based on title and abstract), second-phase screening (based on conclusion), and fulltext screening (based on the entire text), as can be seen from Fig.2.


### Results

Based on the method established, 1400 papers were extracted. After the three-phase filtering process, a collection of 46 papers was selected for the review. Appendix A contains an overview of the extracted papers; a summary of the findings from the selected papers (Appendix A1), the distribution of these papers across databases (Appendix A2) and their distribution by journal or publisher (Appendix A3). The supplementary file contains a complete record of all the extracted papers, from the initial selection to the final 46 papers.


#### Publication period

As Fig.3shows, since 2002, the adoption of H-LCA has been slow. While the number of studies on the topic has increased significantly over the last decade, with 35 papers published between 2011 and 2020 compared to just 7 from 2000 to 2010, the overall number of studies is still relatively low, averaging about 2 publications per year.


#### Geographical distribution of publications

This review compiles studies conducted across 12 countries, as shown in Fig.4. The most significant contributors, in terms of the number of studies, are China and the USA, each accounting for 11 studies. Australia stands out with 8 studies, while Finland and Malaysia have also made contributions with 5 and 4 studies, respectively. Other participating countries include Norway, South Korea, Iran, Türkiye, the UK, Ireland, and Thailand, each contributing 1 or 2 studies.


#### Data, databases and software resources

The studies employed a wide range of sources, software and tools to conduct their H-LCA analyses, as tabulated in Appendix A1. The choice of sources was generally derived from the specific aims and scope of each study. In most cases, the studies relied on local or national data sources for their hybrid models.

National databases were a common choice for P-LCA in the majority of papers. For instance, the AusLCI database[35,36], US LCI database[37]and Chinese Life Cycle Database[38]. Additionally, other regional and global databases such as Ecoinvent[11,39](7 times), ICE database (2 times) and Gabi (2 times) made appearances in different studies. This diversity in database selection can be attributed to the specific requirements of each study (i.e., geographical location) and the availability of relevant data.

For the I-O databases, it was observed that national and economic I-O tables were preferred or used over Multiregional Input-Output (MRIO) tables, with over 85 % of the studies opting for the former. This preference may reflect a focus on regional or national assessments or limitations in the availability of MRIO data. National I-O tables were sourced from official economic statistics, such as the I-O tables from the Bank of Korea[40], Malaysian I-O tables from the Department of Statistics[41]and I-O from the Central Bank of Iran[6]. Additionally, the EIO-LCA model developed by Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) was prevalent, being utilised in numerous studies conducted in the USA and internationally, for example, in Finland[42,43]and Turkey[44]. The preference for one type of table over the other is often aligned with the geographical scope of the study. MRIO tables, while less common, were used in approximately 15 % of the sampled papers; EXIOBASE[13,45](2 times), IELab MRIO[46](5 times) and Eurostat (1 time)[47].

In addition to the P-LCA and I-O LCA databases, a H-LCA database was used in 1 case; the EPiC database[48].

Other datasets and sources tailored to specific H-LCA systems and case studies were utilised. These include price data: Norwegian price book[49], energy data from the Energy Statistical Yearbook (2013)[50]and ISIRI energy consumption values[6]. This is not uncommon, as the H-LCA approach frequently goes beyond P-LCA and I-O LCA datasets and includes supplementary datasets essential for H-LCA systems, such as upstream and downstream cutoff matrices for the H-LCA integrated method.

Software tools also played a role in these studies, with researchers utilising a variety of software to conduct their H-LCA analyses. These tools included dedicated LCA software like SimaPro (4 times), Gabi (two times), and Ebalance LCA (1 time), as well as other software tailored to specific research needs. Examples included MATLAB for calculations[6,51], ESim and eQUEST for energy simulation[52].

Typically, an H-LCA requires two main datasets (I-O LCA and P-LCA). However, the reviewed papers demonstrate that some H-LCA models necessitate many more sources. Teh et al.[22], for instance, aimed to disaggregate the "Ready-mixed concrete and mortar" sector in IELab. To achieve this, they utilised Ecoinvent and AusLCI databases for bottom-up data, various datasets and literature sources for concrete data, trade data from EORA MRIO and cost data from over 15 different


## Table 1

The inclusion and exclusion criteria of the systemic review.

Criteria Inclusion Exclusion Language English Language Non-English Languages Publication Type All (i.e., conference papers, books.) None Time Frame Any None Availability Any Non-free sources based on the University of Bath's library system Other -Duplicate & literature reviews, theoretical and non-building related.

sources (see supplementary materials of the original paper). Not all H-LCA models are this data-intensive. Some used only a few datasets, such as Lausselet, Crawford, and Brattebø[49]who utilised price data with EXIOBASE 3 and Ecoinvent v 3.2 for their model.

Overall, these studies indicate that H-LCA models demand a wider range of datasets and sources compared to P-LCA and I-O LCA methods. While P-LCA and I-O LCA rely on specific background databases such as Ecoinvent, Gabi or EXIOBASE, H-LCA seeks the most relevant data tailored to the unique needs of each model. This underscores the dataintensive nature of H-LCA, and the significant effort required to collect and integrate data. Naturally, this requires expertise to critically evaluate and verify the diverse datasets necessary for the H-LCA model. Additionally, the diversity of the data used, while allowing for tailored approaches suited to specific regions and research objectives, introduces significant variability that complicates direct comparisons between studies due to differences in data granularity, temporal relevance, geographical coverage and system boundaries. This issue is explored further in Section 4.1, which discusses how these variations in data can affect reliability and comparability.


#### Methods of H-LCA

A noteworthy pattern that emerges from this review, as summarised in Table2, is the substantial portion of studies where authors did not explicitly reveal the specific H-LCA method they used. This happened times, which constitutes almost one-third of the entire collection. Meanwhile, the remaining studies cover a diverse range of H-LCA approaches. This includes the Tiered approach, which appeared 6 times (13 %); the Path Exchange (PXC) method, found in 3 instances (over %); Process-based methodologies, adopted 6 times (13 %); Augmented process-based models, used 3 times (over 6 %); Input-output based techniques, applied 9 times (over 19 %); and finally, Integrated approaches, employed in 4 cases (around 9 %). This concurs with Crawford et al.[15], who found that in more than a third of the studied literature they reviewed, authors simply label their study as a hybrid life cycle assessment/inventory (LCA/LCI) without specifying the specific method employed. In addition, there were some cases in which the hybrid method cited by the authors did not match the actual method in use. For example, Famuyibo et al.[53]labelled their approach as "process-based". However, they essentially combined the P-LCA and I-O results. They used GaBi and a bill of quantities to obtain emissions for operational, maintenance, retrofit and end-of-life phases. Materials and services not covered in the process analysis were obtained from the Irish I-O. This hybrid LCA methodology can be understood as a tiered approach, which aligns with Crawford's[15]review paper. The lack of clarity can pose challenges for readers unfamiliar with hybrid LCI methods and can make it challenging to fully understand the approach employed.


#### Disaggregation IO/MRIO in H-LCA

Disaggregation refers to the process of breaking down the aggregated data within IO/MRIO table sectors into finer, more detailed sub-sectors. Table3demonstrates disaggregation on a small scale. Initially (Table3a), sectors (e.g., transport, agriculture) are represented as S 1 , S 2 , S 3 , …, Sn, with cells (e.g., S 11 , S 12 ) showing sector flows (i.e., monetary units, physical units, or both). When Sector 3 (S 3 ) is split into S 3a and S 3b (Table3b), its corresponding rows and columns are divided, splitting  interactions (e.g., S 13 into S 13a and S1 3b ).

IO/MRIO tables are often aggregated into broad categories for the sake of managing large datasets efficiently(Eurostat, 2008). For example, construction activities are combined into a single 'construction' sector in the Asian Development Bank's MRIO (35 sectors)[14]and OECD's MRIO (45 sectors)[55]. This sacrifices granularity and obscures detailed insights that could be gleaned from more disaggregated data[56,57]. Chang et al.[58]disaggregated the Chinese construction sector into 14 subsectors and found that aggregation in the construction sector leads to a 15-225 % overestimation of the energy used in the product chain of buildings. Similarly, Acquaye[59]and Acquaye et al.[60]found that without disaggregation, embodied energy values for the Irish energy supply and construction sectors were inflated by 260 % to 350 %.

As discussed in the Introduction, H-LCA aims to integrate two types of data: detailed P-LCA data with coarse I-O LCA data. When P-LCA data is unavailable, gaps are filled with I-O data. While useful, IO/MRIO data may not provide an ideal representation of specific products (e.g., treating the supply chain of a plaster product as representative of all other construction products). Therefore, disaggregating the IO/MRIO data not only enhances the accuracy of I-O LCA analyses[56,[61][62][63], but also improves the overall accuracy of H-LCA results.

In the papers reviewed, authors have attempted to enhance the specificity of IO/MRIO through the incorporation of P-LCA data into IO/ MRIO tables. However, this approach was relatively less common compared to expanding the P-LCA system. This may be because increasing the specificity of IO/MRIO can be achieved through multiple types of datasets (i.e., physical or monetary data), whereas expanding the P-LCA system typically relies on a single approach (monetary data).

This has been extensively discussed in the literature[51,61,62,64].

Teh et al.[22]conducted a methodological comparison between P-LCA and H-LCA using Australian cement and concrete production as a case study. They disaggregated the "Ready-mixed concrete and mortar" sector of the IELab Supply-and-Use Table (SUT) into nine types. They paired the SUT with GHG data from AGEIS process-specific data from Ecoinvent and AusLCI databases, price data for converting physical units to monetary units and international trade data from Eora MRIO to account for imports. The results revealed higher GHGs for all products compared to P-LCA values.

Wiedmann et al.[65]employed the model developed by Teh et al.[22], along with other previous hybridised models that disaggregate timber and steel production to evaluate the carbon footprint reduction potential by replacing reinforced concrete with Engineered Wood Products (EWPs) in construction. Results showed that using timber significantly reduces emissions for homes and offices, with more savings from carbon sequestration.

Others have focused on energy sectors, such as Zhu et al.[38]and Liu et al.[66]Zhu et al.[38]disaggregated the energy use data for their process-based H-LCA model to align with sectoral classifications proportionally to the total output, in order to explore energy-saving potential in two prefabricated buildings. They found higher embodied energy intensities (13 % and 11 %) compared to process-based models. Liu et al.[66]aimed to understand how household consumption influenced CO 2 emissions in China from 1992 to 2002 using three Chinese I-O tables(1992, 1997 and 2002). They found that Chinese households' CO 2 emissions remained high due to continued spending on pollution-intensive sectors such as manufacturing and energy.

On the other hand, some studies relied on the findings of others or utilised datasets that were not tailored to their specific research context for their H-LCA models. For instance, Zhan et al.[67]employed the disaggregated Chinese I-O model previously established by Chang et al.[58], where the construction sector was broken down into fourteen subsectors, encompassing thirteen building types and civil engineering projects. Additionally, certain studies used datasets originally designed for a specific country. For instance, Kyrö et al.[42], Kyrö et al.[68]and Säynäjok et al.[43]applied the USA EIO-LCA dataset for their research in Finland, despite its focus on the USA. Nevertheless, these studies acknowledge the inadequacy of the selection and advocate for additional efforts to address the aggregation challenge. Table3Schematic illustration of a typical I-O table featuring hypothetical sectors (S), both prior to (a) and following the process of disaggregation (b), adapted from[54].


#### System boundary

Setting the system boundaries in LCA involves determining which unit processes to include when assessing a product or service[9,69]. Ideally, the system boundary should encompass all inputs and outputs of all the unit processes associated with the delivery of the functional unit of the assessment. However, attaining this ideal setup is challenging in real-world scenarios because the number of associated flows of a product can potentially grow exponentially and infinitely, making it difficult to trace all inputs and outputs directly drawn from the environment without human intervention[70]. Constraints such as cost, time and data limitations often prevent the inclusion of every single process[15]. This results in truncation error, where the impact assessment fails to encompass "all" relevant environmental burdens associated with a product or service life cycle. In this case, H-LCA proves valuable in addressing this issue. However, integrating I-O and P-LCA can lead to potential double counting, where overlapping data are counted more than once. These two issues-truncation errors and double counting-are discussed in detail in the following subsections:


##### Truncation error

Truncation error, defined by Ward[70]as 'the proportion of impact not covered by the LCA's system boundaries', is a well-recognised challenge, especially in typical P-LCA setups[21,22,65,71,72]. This error can occur knowingly or unknowingly[15,70]and is recognised at three levels, as explained by Crawford[73]: upstream, downstream, and sideways. Upstream truncation involves setting a system boundary around the analysed product system, often omitting higher-order supply chain processes that are frequently left out at the very beginning (e.g., limestone extraction for cement production). Downstream truncation excludes intermediate manufacturing processes, especially for complex products (e.g., processes between clinker production and the final cement product). This, of course, varies depending on the analytical perspective. Excluding intermediate processes, for example, might be seen as upstream if the focus is on the use phase or end-of-life phase. Sideways truncation refers to processes that are frequently omitted from process analyses due to assumptions of their insignificance to the outcome, lack of data or lack of awareness (e.g., minor additives in cement or auxiliary services).

These errors in impact assessments can vary, with Lenzen[71]noting around 50 % and Crawford[74]reporting figures ranging from 59 % to 87 %, contingent upon the specific product and method employed. Agez et al.[75]hybridised Ecoinvent 3.5 with EXIOBASE 3. They found that following truncation correction, the hybrid database showed a 7 % rise in median and a 14 % increase in average life cycle global warming potential (GWP). However, it is worth mentioning that recent findings by Steubing et al.[76], comparing Ecoinvent and EXIOBASE, have cast doubt on the presence of truncation error phenomena. They found that Ecoinvent-based carbon footprints (CFs) were higher than EXIOBASE CFs for similar products in 51 % of cases. Nonetheless, the incorporation of the entire economy in IO/MRIO ensures that difficult-to-account-for inputs, such as services, are fully captured. For further details, readers are encouraged to consult the work of Perkins and Suh[77].

As such, LCA practitioners have recommended broadening the system boundary by complementing the P-LCA database with the I-O database to fill data gaps and obtain a full picture of the environmental impacts of the targeted product, hence H-LCA. The findings shown later in Section 3.7 shed light on the disparities between P-LCA and H-LCA. However, despite most of these studies addressing the overlapping issues in their methods (discussed in the next section), concerns remain regarding potential overestimation of results. Additionally, uncertainties in results persist regarding the methods used to mitigate double counting-different methods give different results[78]. The double-counting approaches used in the collected papers are discussed in the next subsection.


##### Double-Counting

While an aim of hybrid LCA is to solve the truncation error of typical P-LCA by integrating or combining the two databases, the process introduces complexities that can lead to double counting. Double-counting occurs when the emissions for a particular process are included in both the I-O LCA and P-LCA parts of a hybrid LCA, i.e., there is an overlap in the system boundaries of both the P-LCA and I-O LCA inputs, as shown in Fig.5.

This presents a challenge in balancing accuracy and precision, as explained by Perkins and Suh[77]. Accuracy refers to how close estimates are to the true value, while precision concerns the consistency among estimates. Truncation errors, often resulting in underestimation, can affect accuracy. Although employing a hybrid approach might improve accuracy by addressing truncation errors, it can also reduce precision due to the wider distribution of I-O LCA data within the result. For further details, readers are encouraged to consult the work of Agez et al.[78]for approaches to mitigate double-counting.

In the papers reviewed, several studies have explicitly addressed the issue of double counting in their H-LCA method. All those who explicitly used the PXC method, 3 out of 46, have tackled the issue. The PXC method, developed by Treloar[79]and formalised by Lenzen and Crawford[80], refines the supply chain analysis introduced by Miller and Blair[15,81]. It breaks down the I-O matrix into nodes representing specific goods or services, which are then modified using process data, without altering the overall matrix. The PXC Hybrid method is effective in mitigating double counting because it ensures that transactions are only counted once by exchanging information along the supply chain pathways at the most detailed level of each structural path, thereby preventing duplicate inclusion of transactions. For example, Lausselet et al.[49]applied the method for EXIOBASE and Ecoinvent processes for each material, breaking them down into embodied GHG paths and nodes. Within the disaggregated MRIO model, embodied GHG emissions from nodes with P-LCA data were identified and deducted from the total GHG emissions of the EXIOBASE sector. This deduction yielded an 'I-O remainder', representing the residual GHG emissions not addressed by P-LCA data. This is crucial since the remainder reveals emissions that traditional LCA overlooks, making the assessment complete.

Yu et al.[35]utilised a scenario developed by Yu and Wiedmann[82]to conservatively evaluate the upstream cut-off matrix (C u ) (flows from the P-LCA system to the I-O LCA system) in their integrated hybrid method. This scenario assumes that all physical materials and energy inputs are already included in the process coefficient matrix; hence, upstream inputs are set to zero. It also excludes industries related to material manufacturing, construction, transport and energy from the upstream cut-off matrix.

Stephan et al.[83]utilised a Python package (pyspa)[84]inspired by an algorithm developed by Treloar[85]to support SPA on square A matrices for an unlimited number of flows and any desired number of upstream stages in the supply chain. This results in the creation of a supply chain object consisting of path and node objects, which can then be exported to a CSV format for further analysis. Similarly, Ghaemi and Amidpour[6], Hong et al.[86]and Lenzen and Treloar[87]extracted the key energy pathways using the equation developed by Treloar[79].

Teh et al.[36]adjusted the downstream cut-off matrix (C d ) (flows from the I-O LCA system to the P-LCA system) by nullifying certain sales coefficients when recycled materials replaced virgin ones with the C u matrix, excluding upstream inputs already included in the process inventory to avoid redundancy. Zhu et al.[38]employed a conventional method to avoid double-counting by converting process data into price units using commodity prices and subtracting these values from the expenditure vector before conducting the analysis. However, Rowley et al.[88]criticised this approach and proposed using System Incompleteness Factors (SIFs) to adjust the I-O results, eliminating lower-order burdens.

Guan et al.[51]argue that the SPA method entails a high computational load, limiting its practicality. Therefore, they simplify the process by employing sensitivity analysis in their PXC model, using elasticity coefficients to assess how changes in the direct input coefficient impact the embodied energy of the construction sector. This approach identifies key sector linkages affecting building embodied energy.

Omar et al.[18], Omar et al.[89]and Omar[41]utilised disaggregation constants derived from various sources to refine direct and total embodied energy intensities in various energy sectors, as suggested by Acquaye and Duffy[90]and detailed by Wissema[91]. The authors argue that employing disaggregation constants enhances the accuracy of estimating embodied energy and embodied carbon compared to relying on average values derived from I-O tables, while also preventing instances of double counting.

Overall, the extent of double counting depends on the framework used for the hybrid approach and whether the processes are assumed to have associated truncation errors. Correcting double counting is not straightforward; it involves assumptions and uncertainties, which further complicate H-LCA and can discourage LCA practitioners from adopting it. Also, generally speaking, and based on the studies reviewed, it appears that the issue of double-counting is underreported, which concurs with Agez et al.'s[78].


#### Comparative analysis: H-LCA vs. I-O LCA and P-LCA

Within the selected literature, 15 papers compared the results of H-LCA against I-O LCA or P-LCA or both, as summarised in Fig.6. The figure's values are based on averages-an approach undertaken to streamline data for the creation of a coherent graph. For example, Lausselet et al.[49]performed PXC H-LCA on 12 construction materials (in kgCO2e/kg and kgCO2e/m 3 ), but the figure shows the averages of all these materials. These averages represent a unified metric (percentage) derived from the collective findings of the reviewed papers, not the individual materials or components assessed. The majority of the 15 papers did not provide explicit comparisons. The percentages in the figure represent data that has been adjusted to a common scale for easy comparison, despite the original data being in different units, such as embodied carbon (EC) and embodied energy (EE)[41]and GHG emissions intensities (GEIs)[35].

Fig.6reveals that H-LCA consistently yields higher and more comprehensive results when compared to both I-O LCA and P-LCA, exceeding P-LCA by 5-165 % and I-O LCA by 9-114 %. This implies that H-LCA is able to capture a broader spectrum of environmental impacts. The wide variation in percentage differences stems from varying assessment scopes, materials, and environmental indicators. As discussed previously, accuracy does not equate to precision. A critical question might arise on the reliability of these results. Realistically, the uncertainty of the results is increased when multiple datasets and methods are combined. Also, while H-LCA's higher results reflect its capability to capture more environmental flows, questions arise about the credibility of these findings. Is a high number indicative of better results? In fact, this question has sparked debate in the literature[92][93][94]. Furthermore, there is no standardisation in H-LCA to ensure consistent and comparable results. Addressing these issues would enhance the rigour of H-LCA as an effective environmental assessment tool.


### Discussion

Following the overview of the current state of the field and the identification of key challenges in Section 3, this section addresses Aim 3: potential solutions to address the challenges and knowledge gaps identified. The solutions and gaps discussed are not exhaustive; rather, they concentrate on the most common issues identified in the reviewed papers. These can be grouped into seven main categories: data reliability, H-LCA methods, uptake challenges, future-orientated H-LCA, linearity, scope and leveraging industry 4.0. Table4summarises these limitations and their respective solutions, which are discussed further in the following subsection:


#### Data reliability

Most studies acknowledge limitations related to data reliability, in particular, in relation to quality and availability in their hybrid models. These limitations are often attributed to data unavailability, forcing researchers to rely on assumptions or simplifying, which in turn introduces uncertainties to their findings[35,36,67,95]. As discussed in Section 3.3, the use of different datasets and sources, each with distinct conventions and assumptions, makes it difficult to directly compare studies. This variability introduces challenges in cross-comparison. Even if the H-LCA methodology is similar (e.g., tiered or PXC), comparison becomes challenging if the sources differ. Poor reporting practices further complicate this, as noted by Crawford et al.[15]and Agez et al.[78]. Furthermore, while the primary sources used for H-LCA, particularly P-LCA and I-O LCA data, are relatively easy to identify, as discussed in Section 3.3, the identification of auxiliary sources used in H-LCA studies is not always clear or straightforward in these studies. This is mainly due to the fact that H-LCA necessitates obtaining information from a variety of sources, which makes detailed reporting cumbersome. Moreover, H-LCA methods, currently, are not included in the ISO standards, which limits their use for official reporting or comparisons.

The temporal relevance of the data sources used also deserves attention. Using outdated or mismatched data sources can significantly reduce the relevance and accuracy of findings[24,68]. For example, Wan Omar[41]incorporated data spanning from 2008 to 2015, for both P-LCA and I-O LCA, including both local and international sources, as shown in Appendix A1. This mixture of data, collected over several years, highlights the potential risk of including information that may no longer reflect current environmental conditions, thereby diminishing the study's reliability. Several potential solutions could be explored to address this issue. Updating data, where possible, could mitigate the mismatches in data temporalities. Expanding on this, Yu et al.[35], for example, have employed the KRAS (Konfliktfreies RAS)[96], to update the IELab data from 2008/2009 to 2014/2015. However, this is an exception to the rule, as efforts were not generally made to tackle this issue. Understandably, the time-intensive process, data availability and complexity hinder such updates.

Therefore, given these challenges, there is a clear need for a framework to harmonise these elements-databases, sources, temporal and spatial to make studies more consistent and comparable. Without this, conflicting results will continue to undermine findings and limit the usefulness of H-LCA for decision-making across different sectors or regions. While some efforts have been made in this direction, they remain limited and require further development. For instance, Ghosh and Bakshi[97]suggested a framework for H-LCA by using SPA to select activities according to their significance, parametric uncertainty, and contribution to network complexity. Similarly, Yue et al.[98]introduced a framework that integrates life cycle optimisation framework multi-objective optimisation with integrated hybrid LCA. However, such frameworks remain limited, and more efforts are needed, particularly for the building and construction industries[99]. A harmonised data integration framework could help address these gaps and provide significant improvements. Such a framework could include key elements, such as data collection protocols, validation, temporal and spatial alignment. Data collection protocols would provide clear guidelines for selecting high-quality datasets and require detailed documentation for transparency and comparability. Validation would use tools and metrics to check data quality and ensure consistency in methods. Temporal and spatial alignment would involve regularly updating datasets to reflect current conditions and adapting to regional differences, such as accounting for new technologies in energy use or variations in material availability. This is, of course, merely a simple outline and needs further refinement in future work.

In terms of the data quality, primarily P-LCA and I-O LCA data used in the H-LCA, the authors of the extracted paper, identified several issues, which are discussed further in the subsequent subsections:


##### P-LCA dataset

In the case of P-LCA datasets, a few studies have utilised datasets that are not representative of their geographical location. For example, ICE was used for a Malaysian case study[89], but such instances are rare. This might be a hindrance to employing H-LCA in certain regions. The ongoing expansion of databases, such as Ecoinvent[100], both in coverage and dataset quantity, makes them more versatile and applicable to various locations and regions. This not only supports traditional LCA practices, but it also indicates a positive trend that could boost the adoption of H-LCA in the near future, particularly for data-scarce regions that also need to reduce their emissions.


##### I-O LCA dataset

In regard to the IO/MRIO datasets, they oversimplify industrial complexity by assuming that all goods within a sector are homogeneous, thus disregarding variations in production processes and environmental impacts, as presented in Table5. However, even within granular databases, aggregation can obscure distinctions between materials with varying environmental impacts[101].

Disaggregating IO/MRIO models/tables holds promise for improving accuracy by providing detailed insights into specific industries and sectors. This is not a straightforward task. It necessitates using diverse data sources and various approaches, which can be challenging[56,57]and very resource-intensive. Plus, there has not been a clear guideline on how disaggregation should be approached. Many innovative disaggregation methods have been proposed and implemented[102,103]. Similar methods could be applied to improve the representation of the construction and building sectors.

In addition to the aggregation issue, the use of national I-O data presents its own limitations, as it does not account for international trade, which means it cannot accurately represent the emissions associated with cross-border economic activities and global supply chains[104]. The bulk of the examined publications appeared to rely on national I-O data (as discussed in Section 3.3). While useful, it lacks precision, highlighting the need for MRIO models. In one of the papers reviewed, for instance, Teh et al.[22]employed a two-region I-O framework to integrate environmental impacts from imports and exports between Australia and the Rest of the World (RoW). RoW countries were aggregated into one table with 26 industries instead of individual sectors. According to the authors, the inclusion of a single RoW table enhances study results compared to using Australia's technology assumption alone in a single-region I-O framework. Furthermore, many regions and countries remain underrepresented in the majority of MRIO models. MRIO databases such as EXIOBASE and WIOD primarily group regions such as Africa and Latin America under the RoW region (RoW)[105]. This leads to skewed and less representative results in these regions, which makes the use of H-LCA less appealing. However, the MRIO databases are continuously evolving. EXIOBASE v1, for example, had one RoW region, but the latest EXIOBASE v3 disaggregated the RoW into 5 regions[13]. Also, MRIO models have started to offer high country resolution coverage suitable for H-LCA applications in those countries, such as Eora (covers approximately 190 countries)[106]and GLORIA (coverage for 164 regions)[107]. Recent initiatives, such as EMERGING databases (135 sectors, 245 economies), signify progress in addressing this issue by covering 135 sectors in 245 economies from 2015 to 2019[108]. Despite these developments, MRIOs remain highly aggregated, and some degree of disaggregation is still needed. Other ambitious projects, such as "Getting the data right", are underway and aim to develop hybrid I-O databases with higher granularity, and are expected


#### H-LCA methods

The lack of consensus within the community regarding the definitions of hybrid LCA methodologies has created a confusing and disordered landscape in environmental assessment. This confusion is compounded by researchers using terms interchangeably. For instance, what some researchers label as the integrated approach in their studies is essentially the tiered hybrid approach. This occurs because the integrated H-LCA shares similar mathematical frameworks with the tiered approach[31]. Additionally, the outcomes of various hybrid techniques vary. Different findings were obtained when, for example, Luo and Ierapetritou[31]used a different method to mitigate double counting for integrated H-LCA in their study. Similarly, Jakobs et al.[110]found that different methods for correcting truncation errors result in discrepancies of nearly two-fold. This is to be expected, as different methods bring varying degrees of integration, and H-LCA is data-dependent[93]. This inconsistency introduces uncertainty in research using hybrid methods, thus reducing confidence in their effectiveness[15]and preventing their widespread acceptance as a mainstream tool for environmental assessment[110]. The introduction of a guidance or standard, such as specifying which data or which type of double counting to use, could help address these challenges. For example, Luo and Ierapetritou[31]have presented a guideline delineating the appropriate approaches to mitigating double counting for integrated and tiered methods based on the availability of data and knowledge of the H-LCA system. Before this, Agez et al.[78]reviewed the double counting methods and recommended their use based on factors such as existing knowledge and the scope of the system, the level of detail desired, and the availability of information.


#### Uptake challenges

The adoption of H-LCA faces significant challenges that limit its widespread application. Primarily, it is time-intensive due to the necessity for multiple data sources to conduct an H-LCA. Moreover, integrating these diverse data sources accurately is complex and prone to errors, potentially leading to underestimations or overestimations of environmental impacts. This complexity is compounded by the need for practitioners to navigate through various methodologies and approaches, such as those related to double-counting, different H-LCA methods, and the utilisation of various databases. Additionally, conducting H-LCA requires expertise in both P-LCA and I-O LCA domains to effectively bridge the gap between them, a task that demands a considerable level of expertise. Heijungs et al.[111]noted that despite similar mathematical formulas, some experienced LCA practitioners can still be confused by the differences. Furthermore, the methodology introduces uncertainty (in price units[112], aggregation of IO/MRIO tables[56], lack of reliable data[68]and double counting[78], making H-LCA a less favourable pursuit[110]. Recent efforts have been made to streamline and automate the hybridisation of process-based and input-output data through integrated and PXC H-LCA methods.

To date, and to the best of our knowledge, only two studies have hybridised complete process databases with complete IO/MRIO databases: the Australian Life Cycle Database with the Australian Industrial Ecology Virtual Laboratory using PXC[83]and the hybridisation of the Ecoinvent with EXIOBASE 3 using the integrated method (pylcaio)[75]. This automation could make it easier for practitioners to adapt H-LCA. Additionally, creating hybridised databases tailored to specific geographic contexts could significantly increase the uptake of H-LCA. Hybrid databases have been created recently, specifically for the Australian context: the EPiC[113]and Integrated Carbon Metrics (ICM)[114]databases, all of which are for Australian construction materials. The current focus on specific geographic limits the generalisability of these tools and databases. Additionally, the pylcio tool still requires some level of expertise as it is Python-based. Therefore, user-friendly software, such as SimaPro and OpenLCA, could ease H-LCA adoption for non-experts.


#### Future-Oriented H-LCA

Some of the papers reviewed have highlighted the importance of future-oriented LCA (e.g., dynamic LCA and prospective LCA)[115,116]when assessing environmental impacts within the context of construction to develop future strategies and improve sustainability practices[24,117,118]. Traditional LCA methodology considers only static information and does not take into account temporal data and aggregate activities over time[119,120]. In buildings and construction materials, the service lifespan is typically longer than that of other everyday commercial items. In such a static approach, the impacts of buildings that will develop in the future (e.g., 60 years from now) are assessed using static data, assuming that the circumstances of buildings today will be identical in the future. However, in reality, this is not accurate. When these temporal variations (i.e., energy production and mix evolution) are neglected, results-based decision-making may be hampered, resulting in unrepresentative LCA assessment results[121,122]. Therefore, calls have been made for a more future-orientated evaluation to overcome the flaws associated with traditional LCA[123,124]. The adoption of this approach is anticipated to yield enhanced accuracy in sustainability impact evaluations as they unfold over time. Future-oriented LCA is an evolving area within LCA[115,125], and there is potential to integrate future-oriented variables into H-LCA. A few studies have addressed this on materials such as multicrystalline silicon photovoltaic systems[126]and biogas[127]. However, to the best of our knowledge, no research has yet been conducted on construction materials or buildings in this context.


#### Linearity

The linearity of H-LCA has sparked considerable debate. In linear models, changes in final demand impact all processes (for P-LCA) and sectors (for I-O LCA) equally, leading to proportional growth or contractions[128]. Frequently, linear models overlook critical elements, such as supply-side limitations, economies of scale, and pricing implications[128]. Such a linear approach is applied in both P-LCA and I-O LCA[111], often seen as a "necessary evil" due to constraints in data collection and computation time[93]. Many have advocated for nonlinear models to better capture the intricate economic complexities (i.e., partial and general equilibrium models)[31,128,129].


#### Scope

The applications of H-LCA often seem to be tailored to particular case studies or specific geographic locations, which can limit its generalisability. For instance, Jang et al.[40]contended that their H-LCA methodology was exclusively employed for an elementary school building and the model made for this study may not comprehensively capture the diverse range of building types. Similarly, Famuyibo et al.[53]highlighted the geographic specificity of their H-LCA for Ireland, indicating limited suitability in regions with different construction methods, energy sources, and climates. Other examples of location-specific H-LCA models, such as those in Norway[49]and Finland[130], further accentuate the geographic specificity. Numerous studies have addressed the issue of a limited scope. For example,[49,89]focused their model on the production phase. However, it is important to note that this limitation is not necessarily a downside, as the research's goals and scope can be constrained to a particular stage of building or materials. Plus, the issue is not pertinent to the H-LCA field. It has long been debated by researchers in the realm of traditional LCA[8,131]. However, from the collected papers, it apparent that the data availability and quality pose significant challenges in conducting a holistic H-LCA that covers the entire material or building scope (i.e., from extraction to disposal); see Appendix A1. The EPiC database, for instance, covers only A1-A3 stages, and I-O coefficients are needed to encompass the entire boundary system[48]. Therefore, it is reasonable to argue that an H-LCA model/framework, which requires obtaining multiple databases, faces constraints due to the difficulty of obtaining high-quality data, resulting in a limited scope focus.


#### H-LCA and industry 4.0

Industry 4.0 refers to the fourth industrial revolution, where digital technologies such as the Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML) and digital twins are integrated into manufacturing[132,133]. The integration enables machines and systems to communicate in real time, helping to improve operations through automation of data. While the potential of Industry 4.0 has been explored in traditional sustainability methods, with various studies highlighting applications and pilot studies[134][135][136][137][138], H-LCA has yet to fully explore or integrate these technologies. In the paper reviewed, this was not explicitly addressed and explored, but, it was rather alluded to by a very few papers, such as Dadhich et al.[139], who discussed the necessity of sharing supply chain emission data between different entities to improve environmental results. Numerous applications for the integration are possible. For example, AI and ML could transform H-LCA by streamlining data collection, identifying data gaps and predicting the environmental impacts of a new product based on existing data. Incorporating ML in H-LCA, for example, could resolve temporal mismatches between P-LCA and I-O LCA, as discussed in Section 4.1, by aligning datasets to ensure consistency. Other applications of the integration AI have been implemented for traditional LCA, which suggests that it could be implemented by default in H-LCA, though perhaps with greater difficulty. Additionally, this could potentially lead to the simplification of H-LCA, which, as discussed previously, is more challenging and time-consuming than both P-LCA and I-O LCA. Future research could unlock this potential through this fusion.


### Conclusion

This systematic literature review examines the current status of Hybrid Life Cycle Assessment (H-LCA) for building and construction materials. By synthesising the main findings from 46 relevant papers, it addresses a critical gap in the literature and provides insights to help advance the field. This review is the first to focus specifically on H-LCA's application in the context of building and construction, identifying important findings, key challenges associated with the current practices and pinpointing potential solutions and directions for future work.

H-LCA has matured significantly over the years. Methods have become more sophisticated (e.g., PXC was formalised in 2009) and the databases and resources are continuously evolving. Advances in technology have further enabled efficient data analysis and interpretation, enhancing the overall effectiveness of H-LCA as a tool for sustainability assessment. However, despite these advancements, its adoption remains slow and faces ongoing challenges, highlighting the need for further research and development.

The proposed solutions in this review are just a starting point. There is still a pressing need for more detailed and comprehensive solutions to overcome the barriers hindering H-LCA adoption. As a method capable of capturing broader environmental impacts, H-LCA has the potential to improve practices not only in building and construction but also across other sectors. With continued advancements, it could achieve widespread adoption and make a significant contribution to global sustainability efforts.

For future work, we recommend the following:

• Better reporting of approaches and methods: To advance the field, it is important that methods and approaches are reported with greater clarity and detail. This will enable others, especially less experienced LCA practitioners, to replicate, compare and utilise H-LCA methods more effectively. • Need for educational resources: H-LCA is not adequately covered in educational resources, unlike the many sources available for P-LCA and I-O LCA. More contributions in this area would make the topic more accessible, especially for non-experts, and enable further uptake. • Large-scale review: Although significant differences are not anticipated, a comprehensive review across all sectors (beyond just construction and building materials) is recommended. This might reveal new insights that contribute to a deeper understanding of the applications of H-LCA.

• Framework and guidelines: With the variety of methods, tools, and approaches in H-LCA, setting clear standards and frameworks is essential. This ensures inconsistencies are addressed, making results more comparable and reliable across regions and industries. CRediT authorship contribution statement Abdulrahman Bakindi: Writingreview & editing, Writingoriginal draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Aoife Houlihan Wiberg: Writingreview & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization. Jonathan Norman: Writingreview & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization. Ellie Marsh: Writingreview & editing, Investigation, Conceptualization. Stephen Allen: Writingreview & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.


## A.3. Distribution of Papers by Journal or Publisher

TableA2provides a summary of the distribution of papers identified by journal or publisher. The 4 most popular journals contained 44 % of the papers, with 5 papers in each journal: "Building and Environment", "The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment", "Journal of Cleaner Production," and "Energy and Buildings". The journals "Journal of Infrastructure Systems," "Environmental Research Letters", "Energy Policy" and "Environmental Impact Assessment Review" have a lower occurrence rate, with 3 and 2 papers in each, representing over 19 % of the whole 46 papers. The remaining papers, 17 (37 %), were distributed across 17 different journals.


## Table A2

Distribution of papers by journal or publisher; Table (a) presents the authors, journal/publisher, document type, and source information and Table (b) provides a summary of the occurrences of journals/publications.