---
title: "Reframing how we talk about ‘energy poverty’"
authors:
  - "Stefan Bouzarovski"
  - "Karla G Cedano-Villavicencio"
  - "Laurence L Delina"
  - "Mari Martiskainen"
  - "Tony G Reames"
  - "Neil Simcock"
doi: "10.1038/s41560-025-01794-w"
---


## A critical perspective on energy poverty discourses

We now centre on the discursive framing of energy (and fuel) poverty. The mainstream narratives referring to these HEIs affect the nature of relevant public debates-as well associated strategies and approaches in science and policy-in at least five ways.

The first aspect refers to the ways in which the problem is measured and monitored by government agencies, the private sector, charities and researchers30. For example, most metrics to establish the depth, extent and structure of energy poverty have been expert and government led, with expenditure-based and consensual approaches dominating the relevant literature31. Arguably, the poverty framing has allowed energy poverty to be rendered as measurable and quantifiable in this context32,33. Most energy poverty discourses operate with a relative understanding of poverty-defining deprivation in relation to a context-specific level-as opposed to absolute poverty approaches, encapsulating the inability to afford a set of standardized goods and services. It is difficult to find examples of indicators that have been developed via direct forms of engagement, participation and co-design from people who experience HEIs or groups that seek to represent them. The increased use of machine learning and artificial intelligence to determine energy poverty demographics is part of this trend34. It remains unclear how artificial intelligence-based approaches consider or allow for stakeholder involvement35.

on the language of energy poverty may seem a more trivial matter compared with the extensive investment in technology and infrastructure that is required to improve access to low-carbon energy. Yet, terminology and vocabulary matter because they betray and shape how decision-makers, private companies and the public conceive the drivers of HEIs. Language that focuses on individual or group characteristicsrather than systemic energy issues-can paint some groups as morally deficient or undeserving of support in the public eye.

As researchers and activists in the HEI domain, we too have often employed these terms in our past work9,10. We recognize our own positionality on this matter, and express our self-reflective and self-critical commitment to a more inclusive vocabulary around HEIs, underpinned by a range of recent discussions within the policy, scientific and practitioner communities, as part of several large international projects and networks. Additionally, this Perspective is based on an extensive review of over 500 relevant references, sourced from Scopus and Google Scholar, and using search terms such as energy poverty, 'fuel poverty', 'energy injustice' and others.

We employ the notion of 'discursive framings' to emphasize how the rhetorical devices used to name, describe and explain an issue influence how that issue is understood and acted on11. We start by critically reviewing some of the basic elements of the multiple discursive framings of HEIs, subsequently moving onto the problematic nature of assumptions and constructs that underpin energy poverty in particular. In conclusion, we suggest practical steps towards dismantling the stubborn status quo around the issue.


## Diverse characterizations of HEIs

Energy poverty is now the dominant term that captures HEIs across the world. Historically, it was primarily used to describe insufficient energy technology access, such as the lack of access to electricity in the home, and a reliance on biomass and other solid fuels for cooking and heating. The concept was later expanded to capture a wider set of challenges around insufficient energy services in the home, such as limited cooling and/or heating. As a result, definitions of energy poverty have become highly variegated and context dependent12. When referring to the Global South, they primarily involve the need to promote affordable, reliable and higher-quality energy services with reduced environmental and health impacts. Narrower understandings involve a focus on the use of existing-often traditional-fuels, such as biomass used for cooking and heating, the provision of a minimal level of energy needed to meet daily requirements, or insufficient capabilities to participate in society and achieve human flourishing13.

The European Union also uses the energy poverty framing to address HEIs. Here, there is a stronger emphasis on the affordability of energy bills, as well as the lack of energy services to enable good health and a "decent standard of living" 14 . Outside the European Union, a significant body of scientific and policy research on energy poverty has emerged across the Global North and the 'Global Easts'15alike.

Fuel poverty is also commonly invoked in discussions of global HEIs. Historically, its use was geographically narrower (mainly limited to the UK), with a focus on issues of heating, high energy prices and energy-inefficient homes16(for example, until 2005, the Web of Science listed 26 documents using the term fuel poverty, all pertaining to the UK). Here, there are parallels with the term 'energy burden', predominantly used in US policy and research circles to denote household-based disadvantages connected to high energy prices17, in terms of the share of household budgets dedicated to energy services18.

The notion of 'energy insecurity' is also invoked in debates on HEIs. Its use is frequent in the USA, where, notably, it is often connected to the lived experience of material energy deprivation19: financial risks, consumption cuts, adverse mental and physical impacts, utility bill arrears and shut-offs, informal connections and excessive heat in the home.

'Energy vulnerability' discourses20develop the suggestion that energy-related pressures, risks and difficulties faced by households Perspectivehttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-025-01794-wNon-participatory definitions of the methods, approaches and techniques used to define and measure HEIs may lead to further exclusion and marginalization by the state, due to a lack of understanding of the lived experience of hardship, or the development of indicators that favour some forms of disadvantage over others. Exceptions to this trend can be found in the Mexican proposal to formulate a participatory, human capabilities-centred index36and, more extensively, in New Zealand's extensive public consultation process to define a set of bottom-up energy hardship indicators based on the lived experience of HEIs21. Proposals for lived experience panels in the Netherlands follow a similar approach37.

Second, the drivers of HEIs are often ascribed to a set of readily observable narrow conditions, rather than broader practices of exclusion. The European Union, for example, attributes the causes of energy poverty to the interplay between high energy prices, inadequate building energy efficiency and low household incomes 14 . Despite frequent rebuttals and critiques, these three factors are touted as the most common and persistent drivers of energy poverty, overlooking underpinning policy failures38.

Mainstream energy poverty rhetoric often talks about 'the energy poor', referring to people under a term that can come across as alienating, stigmatizing and domineering. The discourse is often coated in techno-managerial language, especially when referring to improvements of energy access 'for the poor' in the Global South, with limited reference to enduring dynamics of (post-)colonial exploitation and subjugation39or ongoing practices of infrastructural violence, unequal socio-ecological exchange, greenwashing and land grabbing40,41. Moreover, framing energy poverty in terms of 'basic' energy access indicators42can normalize low use of energy in the Global South (versus luxury use in the Global North43) while obscuring the systemic drivers of HEIs.

Third, efforts to simplify energy poverty indicators-partly in response to the complexities of explaining the drivers and interpretation of the condition-may create further challenges. HEIs are not easily captured via a single metric44. The need to define tangible 'expert-led' indicators-primarily to guide resource allocations by governments and/or the private sector-means that particular socio-demographic, infrastructural or spatial circumstances will either be singled out or combined into multi-dimensional, composite metrics31. However, as argued by Kiely and Strong32, composite poverty statistics are a particular form of knowledge production that obscures the deeper politics of inequality.

Fourth, HEIs are narrativized by dominant discourses in ways that themselves promote social exclusion. The terms 'the energy poor', 'the fuel poor' or 'the energy vulnerable' are frequently used in public, scientific and policy debates (for example, see documents by the European Commission45or UK Government46), implicitly suggesting that HEIs are an innate characteristic of affected groups, rather than a structural condition imposed by wider societal and political choices. There is extensive evidence to suggest that the framing of some people and places as 'poor' itself represents a form of stigmatization47. Such interpretations can foster a culture of judgement-an us-versus-them mentality-that hinders collective efforts to address poverty and instead centres attention on the supposed failings of people who are experiencing hardship. Another form of othering can be found in the terms 'hard to reach' and 'hard to help'48, which are primarily employed in the context of energy efficiency measures targeted at people on low incomes49.

Fifth, commonly used energy poverty narratives are increasingly accompanied by the medicalization of energy injustices in the home. This involves deploying clinical language to describe poverty (for example, 'diagnosis' or 'prescription'), to "de-emphasize the allocation of income and emphasize the treatment of poverty in terms of correcting personal problems"50. Medicalization has entered energy poverty through debates on the relationships between HEIs and health, given the adverse effects of inadequate household energy services on both physical and mental well-being51. Medicalization, however, may perpetuate harmful socio-demographic and geographic perceptions.


## Conclusions and future outlook

Having critically examined the content and implications of the global discursive frame around HEIs, we would single out three key recommendations for research, policy and practice.

First, there is a need to move away from relying on language that individualizes the causes of HEIs, and from narratives that-either implicitly or explicitly-place the burden of responsibility onto people experiencing energy-related hardships. The list includes terms that depict people experiencing HEIs as passive 'victims', 'the poor', 'the hard to reach', 'left behind', being 'last-mile communities', suffering from 'sickness' or needing 'diagnosis' or 'prescription'. Such wording implicitly (and sometimes explicitly) ties drivers of HEIs solely in relation to the traits of the object of inquiry: individual people, their homes and the places they live in.

Second, we recommend employing nomenclatures that capture the broader social and economic factors that underpin HEIs. Concepts such as 'underserved', 'seldom heard', 'hardly reached' and many others49can help foreground limited access to adequate energy and housing infrastructures, the political de-prioritization of energy efficiency and energy access, as well as economic pressures on incomes. These concepts draw attention to the institutional structures and policy decisions that drive HEIs, including distributional energy price and subsidy policies and socio-political marginalization more broadly.

Third, researchers and practitioners should rely on participatory processes (stakeholder consultations, co-design, co-production, citizen panels and so on) to co-develop scientific and public vocabularies on HEIs. Approaching HEIs through the shared and lived experience of deprivation provides a tangible way forward in many instances, as in the New Zealand example discussed above. Indeed, the European Anti-Poverty Network talks about 'people experiencing poverty' rather than 'the poor'. Energy precarity-inspired thinking can allow for a fundamental reframing of the dominant terminologies that underpin the geographies, indicators and drivers of HEIs, by centring the diverse voices of affected groups, as well as associated forms of political contestation and resistance.

Finally, our aim is not to silence the debate on the appropriate terminology to capture HEIs, but rather to highlight the importance of the question, open the space for continued discussion and suggest some of the principles that could provide a basis for moving forward. Importantly, we acknowledge the past (and in some cases present) utility of many of the HEI-related concepts that have been unpacked and critiqued here, particularly in terms of aiding the public and scientific recognition of energy poverty. As HEI experts and policy advocates, we have too frequently employed the terms energy poverty and fuel poverty in our own past work, as well as their problematic derivatives-the fuel poor and the energy poor. To some extent, this has been driven by the need to gain recognition within dominant decision-making circles and scientific debates. However, with the mainstreaming of energy poverty across multiple policy registers, we believe that there is now an opportunity to move towards co-produced, inclusive and contextualized framings. The dictionary that is used to narrate HEIs must develop in step with the urgency and scale of the effort needed to address these forms of disadvantage, as well as the rapidly evolving state of knowledge in the energy poverty domain. Enacting a transformative global effort to tackle HEIs means challenging the language that reinforces existing power imbalances and maintains the status quo. Instead of symptomatic treatment, we must speak to the unequal power relations that drive energy inequities in the home.